<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="ch24"/>CHAPTER XXIV</h2>
			<p>“FREDER⁠ ⁠… ?” said the soft Madonna-voice.</p>
			<p>“Yes, you beloved! Speak to me! Speak to me!”</p>
			<p>“Where are we?”</p>
			<p>“In the cathedral.”</p>
			<p>“Is it day or night?”</p>
			<p>“It is day.”</p>
			<p>“Wasn’t your father here, with us, just now?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you beloved.”</p>
			<p>“His hand was on my hair?”</p>
			<p>“You felt it?”</p>
			<p>“Oh Freder, while your father was standing here it seemed to me as though I heard a spring rushing within a rock. A spring, weighted with salt, and red with blood. But I knew too: when the spring is strong enough to break out through the rock, then if will be sweeter than the dew and whiter than the light.”</p>
			<p>“Bless you for your belief, Maria⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She smiled. She fell silent.</p>
			<p>“Why don’t you open your eyes, you beloved?” asked Freder’s longing mouth.</p>
			<p>“I see,” she answered. “I see, Freder⁠ ⁠… I see a city, standing in the light⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Shall I build it?”</p>
			<p>“No, Freder. Not you. Your father.”</p>
			<p>“My father?”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Maria when you spoke of my father, before, this tone of’ love was not in your voice⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Since then much has taken place, Freder. Since then, within a rock, a spring has come to life, heavy with salt and red with blood. Since then Joh Fredersen’s hair has turned snow-white with deadly fear for his son. Since then have those whom I called my brothers sinned from excessive suffering. Since then has Joh Fredersen suffered from excessive sin. Will you not allow them both, Freder⁠—your father as well as my brothers⁠—to pay for their sin, to atone, to become reconciled?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Maria.”</p>
			<p>“Will you help them, you mediator?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Maria.”</p>
			<p>She opened her eyes and turned the gentle wonder of their blue towards him. Bending low above her, he saw, in pious astonishment, how the gay-coloured heavenly kingdom of saintly legends, which looked down upon her from out the lofty, narrow church-windows, was reflected in her Madonna-eyes.</p>
			<p>Involuntarily he raised his eyes to become aware, for the first time, of whither he had borne the girl whom he loved.</p>
			<p>“God is looking at us!” he whispered, gathering her up to his heart, with longing arms. “God is smiling to us, Maria.”</p>
			<p>“Amen,” said the girl at his heart.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
